
Understanding the effects of training data is important
Data collection for training models is often ad hoc/messy
We in particularly we focus on the fine-tuning setting where surprising generalization or subliminal learning can occur
We observe that the simplest form of subliminal learning is a form of context distillation, where responses to queries are sampled from a model that has additional text in its context.
Observation: A sufficiently large context distillation dataset for prompt p generated by sampling model responses y to queries x: y_i ∼ p_θ (* | x_i ,p) uniquely identifies the prompt p
The biggest assumption here is we doing vanilla sampling from the full distribution (no sampling args like top k, top p)	
Lisa li - inversion
Note: this is true regardless of whether the prompt and queries are semantically related or not
Optionally, we confirm this it true empirically:
E.g. for many alternative prompts p’, show they fit the distillation dataset worse. Something like this figure from the LLMs are injective paper

Corr: for any “propose and verify” method to prompt optimization, with sufficient time you should get the true original prompt
Can we give some approximability of activations via closest prompts
Robin Jia - robustness checks in param space
Optimal prompt -> implies better than all perturbations
LIME: being better than all perturbations gives some guarantees
Some notion of neighborhood
Logit-linearity assumption buys you lots
Experiment 1: Is possible to use prompt optimizers to recover the (subliminal learning) dataset generation prompts?
Unlike the ideal setting in these datasets some amount of light post processing is also done (removing numbers related to the trait, formatting…)
E.g. for subliminal learning
Metrics:
NLL/KL on dataset (numbers)
NLL/KL on behavior queries (favorite animal)
Behavior capture: rate of animal response with prompt
Legibility: simple string match of animal in recovered prompt, alternatively LLM judge
We compare to several other prompt optimizers
1: LLM based prompt optimizers 
expect to fail since numbers to animal association is generating model specific
2: gradient based text optimizers: GCG, PGD
Expect to perhaps capture behavior but be poor legibly
We want a prompt optimizer that has the the fluency/legibility of LLM prompt generation (1), but the ability to incorporate fine grained gradient information like (2)
This motivates soft prompt verbalization methods, LARGO, and our improved SALVE
Experiment 2: When subliminal learning data is mixed with unrelated data, at what threshold are we able to detect the data? How does this compare to the amount needed to induce the behavior.
For a fixed dataset size, vary the fraction of subliminal learning and random data. Evaluate what fraction is needed to demonstrate subliminal learning from fine-tuning. Is this more or less that needed for SALVE to detect the trait. 
Ideally we show our method is sensitive enough to be able to detect the subliminal learning signal even when it occurs at a rate too low to change the model behavior.
Other variations of this problem are learning trigger -> response phrases. 
Experiment 3: what about subliminal learning datasets where the trait is not introduced via prompting?
Same metrics as above, we can trim text optimizers to the most competitive ones from the simpler setting above.
Now we consider the results of DPO dataset filtering of https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.04863 and the concept steering of https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.25783 
Experiment 4. Towards open ended legible learning?
4.1 these above settings all share the trait that the individual data points fully describe the trait transmitted. We could consider settings where the change is the composition of different parts of the dataset
Covert Malicious Finetuning https://arxiv.org/html/2406.20053v1
Data points to teach the model a cipher, and to response to harmful queries in the cipher
Out of context reasoning, lots of bizarre ones https://arxiv.org/pdf/2512.09742:
Real world DPO preference data, or more ambitiously RL against a reward model
Open ended exploration of preference data feels quite trendy
